---
layout:     post
title:      What's in a Name? Numerical Analysis, Scientific Computing, and CSE.
tags: musings
---

<blockquote>
<p>
<q>Then you should say what you mean,</q> the March Hare went on.
</p>
<p>
<q>I do,</q> Alice hastily replied; <q>at least--at least I mean what I
say--that's the same thing, you know.</q>
</p>
<p>
<q>Not the same thing a bit!</q> said the Hatter. <q>You might just as well
say that 'I see what I eat' is the same thing as 'I eat what I
see!'</q>
</p>
<small>
Lewis Carroll, 
<a href="http://www.gutenberg.org/ebooks/928">Alice's Adventures in Wonderland</a>
</small>
</blockquote>

During a [panel session on "the future of numerical analysis" at ICIAM
2007][2], there was a lively debate about what we should call our
field.  Is numerical analysis the right name, or should we call
our work scientific computing, or computational science and
engineering?  I don't think there is necessarily a "right" name for
this area, but I do think that the different names emphasize different
aspects of the field.  This note is my attempt to clarify what *I*
mean when I refer to numerical analysis, scientific computing, or
computational science and engineering.

### Numerical Analysis

In mathematics, the word "analysis" usually refers to the
study of continuous things and the limiting processes that define
them.  Numerical analysis combines the ideas of analysis with numerical
computation.  As Trefethen puts it in his [essay on the definition of
numerical analysis][1], "numerical analysis is the study of algorithms
for the problems of continuous mathematics."
Like other areas of mathematical analysis, numerical is *not* purely
analytical in the conventional sense.  Numerical analysis is also
about *synthesis* of new methods.  We are, among other things,
engineers of mathematics, and we balance tradeoffs between different
approximations in order to design methods that are both fast enough
and accurate enough.

Of course, it is a little silly to parse field names too closely.  The
meaning of "numerical analysis" lies in how we use the phrase more
than in the meanings of the component words.  Still, it seems to me
that we say "numerical analysis" most often when we refer to the
mathematical aspects of numerical method design and analysis.

### Scientific Computing

I have a book on my shelf entitled [Theoretical Numerical
Analysis][3].  You can probably guess that it is about the theory
underlying various numerical methods, with a particular emphasis on
the approximation of differential and integral operators.  I do not
have a book called Theoretical Scientific Computing, and I have a hard
time imagining what such a book would even cover.  So if scientific
computing doesn't mean the same thing as numerical analysis, what does
it mean?

If numerical analysis is about the mathematical aspects of numerical
method design and analysis, scientific computing is about the aspects
that involve the computer.  When I worry about cache architecture, or
when I parallelize numerical methods, or when I build little tools to
automatically generate parts of my scientific codes, I work on
scientific computing.  The relationship between scientific computing
and numerical analysis is, I think, similar to the relationship
between theoretical computer science and systems design -- they're two
distinct areas, though the line between them is fuzzy and neither
would thrive alone as well as they thrive together.

### Computational Science and Engineering

Computational science and engineering (CSE) research combines
applications, mathematics, and software.  Numerical analysis and
computer science are critical to CSE work, but the research is driven
by applications to scientific and engineering.  According to the [SIAM
Working Group on CSE Education][3], "Although it includes elements
from computer science, applied mathematics, engineering and science,
CSE focuses on the integration of knowledge and methodologies from all
of these disciplines, and as such is a subject which is distinct from
any of them."

By default, I call my own work computational science and engineering.
While my expertise is in mathematics and computing, I tend to be
driven by applications.  That is, given that there are too many things
that I *could* learn next, I choose what I *will* learn next based on
how it will help my collaborators and I better understand some
scientific or engineering application.

 [1]: http://www.comlab.ox.ac.uk/nick.trefethen/publication/PDF/1992_55.pdf
 [2]: http://www.siam.org/news/news.php?id=1214
 [3]: http://www.siam.org/students/resources/report.php
