---
layout:     post
title:      Fictitious forces and skew matrices
tags: math
---

In order to figure out some gyroscope simulations recently, I had to go back
and revisit the derivation of fictitious forces in rotating frames.  I always
got confused by this the first time I was exposed to it, partly because I
didn't really understand the relation between cross products, rotations, and
skew symmetric matrices back then.  I worked it out for myself, and my notes
have been sitting quietly in a corner of my drive since then.  So this is my
excuse to see how well [MathJax](http://www.mathjax.org) works.

Suppose that $x(t) \in \mathbb{R}^3$ 
represents the position of a material point in a rotating reference frame, 
and $y(t) \in \mathbb{R}^3$ represents the point in an 
inertial frame.  The two coordinate vectors are connected by an orthogonal 
matrix,
$$
  y(t) = Q(t) x(t).
$$
Acceleration is the second derivative in the inertial frame, i.e.
$$
  a = \ddot{y} = \ddot{Q} x + 2\dot{Q} \dot{x} + Q \ddot{x},
$$
and the inertial force is $ma(t)$ in the inertial frame.

In the rotating frame, the inertial force is
$$
  m Q^T a = m ( Q^T \ddot{Q} x + 2Q^T \dot{Q} \dot{x} + \dot{x} ).
$$
The $m \ddot{x}$ term is straightforward enough,
but clearly we need to understand $Q^T \dot{Q}$ and
$Q^T \ddot{Q}$.  To do this, it's useful to write
$\dot{Q}$ as $\dot{Q} = Q S$. 
Remember that $Q$ satisfies the identity
$$
  Q^T Q = I,
$$
so $\dot{Q}^T Q + Q^T \dot{Q} = S^T + S = 0$; that is, 
$S$ is a skew-symmetric matrix.  Multiplying a vector 
by a skew symmetric matrix is exactly equivalent to taking a cross 
product with a vector, so we might also write $S = \Omega \times$.
If we differentiate the relation $\dot{Q} = Q S$, we have
$$
  \ddot{Q} = \dot{Q} S + Q \dot{S} = Q (S^2 + \dot{S}).
$$
Therefore, we can write the inertial force in the rotating frame as
$$
  m Q^T a = m ( S^2 x + \dot{S} x + 2 S \dot{x} + \ddot{x} ).
$$
We now give names to each of the pieces of this expression.  The centrifigul force is 
$$
  -m S^2 x = -m \Omega \times (\Omega \times x), 
$$
the Coriolis force is 
$$
  -2m S \dot{x} = 2 m \Omega \times \dot{x},
$$
and the Euler force (which vanishes if the rate of rotation $S$ is constant) is 
$$
  -\rho \dot{S} x = -\rho \dot{\Omega} \times x.
$$

What do I take away from all this?  Three things, I think:

1. "Fictitious forces" is just a fancy way of refering to the product rule.
2. [Textile](http://www.textism.com/tools/textile/) intrudes
   just enough into the raw input text that it can screw up MathJax.
   Better be careful mixing the two systems.
3. Debugging problems with MathJax -- like debugging problems with LaTeX,
   I suppose -- is not altogether easy.

UPDATE (2012-01-31): Actually, I'm now using Markdown via kramdown,
and it works just fine with MathJax.
