---
layout:     post
title:      Thinking about a Ph.D. in computational science
tags: advice
---

Several times a semester, I am asked by students coming from a background in
engineering or the hard sciences about the possibility of pursuing scientific
computing either through a graduate minor or a Ph.D. in computer science.
I usually point students interested in a graduate minor toward our
[computational science and engineering minor field](http://www.cis.cornell.edu/cse/),
which is often a better fit for what they want.  But answering the question
about getting a Ph.D. in computer science is trickier.  I wrote a reply
to one such message last night, and I think it might be worth summarizing
what I said for my own future use.

Computational science work is naturally interdisciplinary, and it's helpful to
approach it with a broad background in computer science, mathematics, and some
application area.  Some universities have interdisciplinary CSE programs that
make these breadth requirements explicit.  At most places, though,
computational science research takes place within departments of computer
science, mathematics, or application fields.  Departments have their own
breadth requirements, and these requirements make it impractical for most
people to do a Ph.D. in a field where they lack significant undergraduate
coursework.  For example, a graduate student in computer science at Cornell is
required to take competency requirements in artificial intelligence,
programming languages, systems, and theory.  These requirements would be quite
challenging for a student without some CS coursework, even if that student had
a strong programming background.  As a practical matter, then, someone who
comes primarily from a physics background and wants to do a Ph.D. in
computational science should probably look for physics programs with
computationally-oriented faculty rather than looking for CS programs.  It just
makes it easier to jump through the initial hoops, leaving students with more
time to get the breadth of background that they will need to do good
computational work.

Apart from determining the program requirements (including the breadth
requirements), one's major in graduate school doesn't particularly limit one's
options.  I have my Ph.D. in computer science, but my graduate coursework
was almost equal parts in math, CS, and mechanical engineering, and I was
co-advised by a civil engineer working in computational mechanics.  This
path turned out to never be an issue.  Now that I'm on the other side of
the fence, I have students in applied physics and applied mathematics in
addition to CS students, and I'm an outside committee member for many
applied math and engineering students, which has also turned out to never
be an issue, at least so far.

While the choice of a major in graduate school is not directly vital to
the type of research training a student can undertake, the choice of advisor
*is* critical.  Of course, it is important to have an advisor who can help
guide a student through an interesting dissertation project.  But the advisor
also plays a critical role in introducing students to a research community,
and in introducing the students to the norms of that community.  So an
outstanding scientist who uses computation tangentially in his work might
not be the ideal advisor for a student who wants to work in computational
methods, even though he might be very well qualified to introduce the student
to the computational ideas to which he is frequently exposed.  Of course,
a Ph.D. advisor is not the only source of advice in graduate school,
but he or she should still ideally be a broad source of advice.

