---
layout:     post
title:      Why eigenvalues?
tags: [teaching, math]
---

It's the start of a new academic year.  Among other things, that means that I
get to introduce myself to new students and to tell them briefly about the
things I work on.  Brevity and humor go a long way in such introductions, so I
usually just say that I'm obsessed with eigenvalues, and give one or two
examples of projects I work on that boil down to spectral analysis --
preferably the types of problems where the connection isn't completely obvious,
since those tend to draw more interest and lead to more interesting follow-up
conversations.

Of course, just because I'm obsessed with eigenvalues doesn't mean anyone else
should be.  Furthermore, if I really was only interested in these things out of
some psychological abnormality, I probably wouldn't be particularly good at
interesting anyone else, and getting other people interested is a big part of
the game.  So, other than obsession, why do I think eigenvalues are
interesting?  My top three reasons are:

1.  Eigenvalue analysis lets me decouple the dynamics of systems.  Instead of
    having to understand the evolving interactions of a hundred different
    quantities, I can focus on one interaction mode at a time.  This sort of
    analysis is tremendously powerful even if I'm interested in nonlinear 
    dynamical systems, since I can use eigenvalues and eigenvectors to 
    describe the start of phenomena like bucking or the birth of unstable 
    oscillations.
2.  Eigenvalue problems are a type of nonlinear equation that I know how to
    solve.  So if I can turn your problem into an eigenvalue problem, I can
    probably figure out how to solve it.  Because there is an intimate 
    connection between eigenvalues and polynomials, I can turn an awful lot 
    of problems involving polynomials into eigenvalue problems, so it's not 
    so implausible that I might be able to turn your problem into an 
    eigenvalue problem.
3.  Similarly, symmetric eigenvalue problems are almost the only non-convex
    optimization problem where I know how to find globally optimal solutions.
    Consequently, when I find things that aren't actually eigenvalue problems 
    but are something much harder, I'm tempted to take off my glasses and 
    ask if it doesn't look like an eigenvalue problem after all.  Enough other 
    people have this same temptation that it has a special name: continuous 
    relaxation.

