---
layout:     post
title:      Effective graduate school applications
tags: advice
last_updated: 2011-12-13
---

Last year, I was on the admissions committees for both computer science and
applied mathematics.  Consequently, I spent an inordinate amount of time in
January reading folders.  I agreed to serve on both committees again this year.
The end of this process is in sight now, but before I put it behind me and get
on with the semester, I thought I would share what I've observed about the
folders that stand out.

I look for two things: background and research potential.  The CS Ph.D. program
at Cornell has qualifying exam requirements in theory, systems, AI, and PL that
should be passed in the first couple semesters.  A student who will struggle
with those requirements is a risk.  On the other hand, a student with great
coursework who has never worked on an undergraduate research project is also a
risk.  There are exceptional students who are clear stars despite a lack of
research experience or a hole in their background.  But those students are the
exceptions, and not the rule.

Strong applicants have strong transcripts.  Though I adjust my criteria some
depending on what I know of grade inflation at different schools (including
what I can learn from the letter writers and from the other people reading
folders), I look for mostly A or A- grades at most schools.  I don't mind a
handful of B grades.  But if a student who wants to study AI has B- grades in
AI classes, I wonder.  I care about the quality of the courses, too.  A student
who wants to study systems should have more than one good systems courses in
her transcript.

Strong applicants come with letters that say they are special.  A letter that
says "Sally came to my office hours frequently, and did very well in class"
does not lower my opinion of Sally, but it does not have nearly the impact of a
letter that says "Sally made an important contribution to the research done by
my group, and will be the third author on a major journal publication."

Strong applicants have experiences with strong places.  That does not mean that
every applicant must attend a major research university; there are some
outstanding small liberal arts schools that graduate highly talented students.
It does mean that I place much more weight on an applicant from the University
of Eastern West Northlands if she has a glowing letter written from a summer
research project mentor at MIT.

I care about the statement of purpose.  I want to read statements that tell me
in clear terms why the applicant would like to attend Cornell, in what areas
she might want to work, and which faculty she finds particularly exciting.  I
want to see that the student understands what she did in her research, and did
not just follow directions without ever learning about the broader context.

I understand that beginning graduate students generally don't know the topic of
their dissertation.  But I want to see that they have a feasible idea of where
they might start.  I am not impressed by a student who says she wants to do
research on proving P != NP, and I am worried by a student who says she is
fascinated by the work of one professor and would not dream of working with
someone else.  Murphy's Law does not go away in graduate school, and the most
famous professor in the department cannot advise an infinite number of
students.  By all means, dream big, but have a backup.

