---
layout:     post
title:      Disconnected operation
tags: [technology, musings]
---

When I was in high school, network connectivity seemed like a marvelous thing.
I played with gopher (remember gopher?) over a relatively slow modem connection,
and it was great.  But for the most part, I used the computer as an isolated
object.  I spent most of my time programming, with breaks to look at paper
documentation when it was necessary.

When I was an undergraduate, I worked almost exclusively on computers that were
connected via the campus network.  But those computers were either desktop
machines or servers that I connected to via desktop machines.  Nobody I knew
had a laptop computer, for example, and there was no such thing as a smart
phone yet.  So I was connected when at the computer, and disconnected
otherwise.

In graduate school, I got my first laptop.  I was connected whenever I was on
campus, but I had intermittent connectivity elsewhere, including the apartment
where I lived during my last couple years at Berkeley.  So I still spent a lot
of time in places where there was no network access (or none that I was willing
to pay for).  I still sometimes used my laptop to write code or text when I was
disconnected, but mostly I treasured doing other things in those times when
there was no network available.  I spent a lot of time scribbling with a pen
and pad.  This trend continued when I was a postdoc.

Things are more complicated now, for several reasons.  I have a smart phone,
though I've gotten pretty good at leaving it alone when I want deliberately to
disconnect.  But my phone is not tethered to my computer, so I often find
myself in states of intermediate connectivity: able to check email on my
phone), but not to respond efficiently, since typing on my phone is painfully
slow; able to write code and browse online documentation, but kept by firewalls
from checking that code into a central repository unless I'm willing to start a
VPN and bounce my connection through three intermediate hosts; able to see when
there are software updates I should apply, but unable to apply them until I've
moved to a connection with higher bandwidth.  And every so often it dawns on me
-- and I know I am not alone in this thought -- that this sort of intermediate
level of connectivity can be miserably frustrating, and is not what I want.
What I want is disconnected operation: just me, the computer, and a pad of
paper, with no network at my fingertips by phone or other device.  But this
state is surprisingly difficult to achieve.
