---
layout:     post
title:      Tis the Season
tags: [technology, musings]
---

It seems that every couple years, I go a little nuts around the start of the
new year.  Some years, this involves sticking my head under a blanket and
going on a two-week-long fiction reading binge, with breaks to eat and to shower
and (grudgingly) to sleep.  Somehow, I don't think that's going to happen any
more, or at least not until the little one becomes sufficiently big that she
also thinks that two weeks of nothing but reading sounds like fun.  But some
years, a little voice in the back of my head says "hey, you've finally got a
little time to fiddle with all those things you thought you were going to fiddle
with earlier in the year!"  This little voice is, of course, somewhat deluded.
The lack of immediate deadlines is not the same things as an excess of time,
and what I really *should* do is mark things of my list of deferred chores.
But I listen to the little voice anyhow.  As I say, I go a little nuts.

Some years, my fiddling involves rewriting chunks of software, or launching
headlong into a new bit of code.  This year, it looks like the part of my
crocodile brain that evaluates shiny things has decided that infrastructure
projects are particularly attractive.  So I now have a Windows development
environment again (hosted under a virtual machine using Parallels), I have my
repositories up on [bitbucket](http://www.bitbucket.org), and I've mapped out
some major clean-up tasks for my research codes.  I'm itching to finish the
revisions to my [matexpr](http://www.cs.cornell.edu/~bindel/sw/matexpr/) tool,
and to use this more powerful tool to factor out some redundant garbage in one
of my finite element codes.  I've figured out how to convert PDF files to WMF
files on my new Lion laptop, which seems to dislike pstoedit for reasons I
cannot fathom.  This was susprisingly difficult.  And I figured out how to
record screencasts on the same laptop.  This was surprisingly easy (start
QuickTime Player and click "Record New Screencast" in the menu), though I'm
still figuring out what precisely I want from these screencasts.

I could expend a lot of energy fighting these impulses, but that seems
counterproductive.  I enjoy these infrastructure projects because they are
fairly limited in scope and they involve a different sort of head scratching
from research, teaching, or proposal writing.  But I do need to keep up with
my other tasks, too.  So: this winter session, my mornings are for writing.
If I do that, I figure I can keep the afternoons for hacking around,
particularly if much of that hacking around produces something useful.

Could this be an early New Year's resolution?  Or would calling it that just
jinx my plans?
