---
layout:     post
title:      A note to IIT internship applicants
tags: advice
last_updated: 2011-12-13
---

If you are reading this, it is likely because you are an IIT student who wrote
me to seek an internship, and I directed you here.  At present, I do not have
internship opportunities for students outside Cornell.  If you are really
interested in doing research with me, please do consider applying to our Ph.D.
program when you graduate!  In the mean time, though, I would like to mention a
two points that may help you in your search (adapted from a 
[Ph.D. comics post](http://www.phdcomics.com/proceedings/viewtopic.php?t=18353&sid=26d4857156691cd51ef004ba4deafac4) that is worth checking out).

First: Your letter is a writing sample.  Treat it as such.  Check your spelling,
punctuation, and usage before you send anything.  Describe your qualifications
clearly, but concisely.  Leave out the sentence "I have a passion for your
research area"; instead, show your passion by describing why my research area
interests you.

Second: I appreciate when students are interested in my work.  If you write me
an email that addresses me and mentions reasons you specifically would like to
work with me (and specific qualifications that are relevant to my work), I will
at least try to send a polite reply, and I will likely remember your email
later.  In contrast, if you send the same form email to me that you sent to
thirty other CS professors, I will likely reply tersely (if at all) and forget
about it within minutes.

Cornell CS is trying a small IIT internship program this summer.  You may want
to contact your department's internship coordinator to find out about the
details.
