---
layout:     post
title:      Teaching Scientific Computing vs Numerical Analysis
tags: teaching
---

For reasons that mostly boil down to staffing, we're considering some revisions
to our scientific computing course offerings at the undergraduate level.  One
way forward is to retire the one-semester survey course, and encourage students
to take a somewhat more advanced course that is a natural part of a
two-semester sequence offered jointly with math.  But nothing is ever that
simple, and I spent far more time than I intended this week chasing down the
implications of such a change and putting them into a memo for the people
involved in these courses.

One of the interesting questions that arises really boils down to philosophy:
how much should an introductory course on numerical analysis focus on the
mathematical properties of different methods, and how much should it focus on
the intelligent application of those methods to problems drawn from application
areas?  Or, more tersely, what's the right balance between numerical analysis
and scientific computing in an introductory class?

I think the group that usually teaches these classes more-or-less agrees that
we should motivate our students by connecting numerical methods to the problems
where they are used.  The traditional examples drawn from physics are one
interesting source, but I think it's exciting how many other places require
large-scale computations with continuous mathematical models, too: the analysis
of social networks, the design of movie recommendation systems, the processing
of medical images, and the rendering of graphics for games and movies.  Of
course, the real issue is that all of these applications involve knowledge
beyond the understanding of numerical methods, and it can be hard to balance
the desire for something realistic with the need to have projects with a
reasonable scope.

I suppose these issues aren't unique to scientific computing.  They just happen
to be issues I'm thinking of in that context at the moment.
