---
layout:     post
title:      Alas, United
tags:       fiver
---

I was in Denver for a meeting on Wednesday, and flew back to the east
coast on the Wednesday night red-eye.  I knew on departure that the
weather was not good for flying: we went from Denver to Newark via
southern Texas because of a solid line of storms up the middle of the
country, and we hit some weather-related turbulence on our descent
into Newark.  But we made it into Newark in plenty of time for me to
reach my connecting flight to Ithaca, leaving at 8:15 am on Thursday
morning, and I had high hopes that it might be able to leave in time
to beat the weather.  This was, perhaps, wishful thinking.

The 8:15 flight was cancelled due to mechanical problems, and I was
re-booked to the 2:40 flight.  Taking the Shortline bus from NYC to
Ithaca takes about five hours, so I probably should have realized then
that I might be better off just cutting my losses.  But I was not at
my sharpest after the red-eye, and so I decided to wait for the
afternoon flight.  After that was cancelled, and after I heard the
gentleman in front of me in the customer service line complaining that
he could not wait for three days for the next open seats, I decided to
bail.  I went into the city by train and subway, hopped onto a bus at
Port Authority, and was in Ithaca by 9:40.  On the bus ride up, I saw
what the weather was like, and understood that it was probably just as
well that the 2:40 flight was cancelled.

United has not registered that I bailed on them, and so I have been
receiving a sequence of emails over the past day or so about the
delays to my re-booked flight.  At the latest estimate, I would be
leaving Newark today (Saturday) at 5:42 pm, 2.5 days after arriving
there.  And I have no confidence that the flight will actually leave
at the current time estimate.  Fortunately, I'm home, so this doesn't
much matter to me.  

Tomorrow is my extended family reunion.  I missed the reunion last
year because I was stuck in Chicago for a while under very similar
circumstances: same red-eye flight, same weather, same list of
cancellations and delays, same airline.  There's a lesson in there
somewhere.
