---
layout:     post
title:         Tree
tags:        [fiver]
---

A couple weeks ago, a tree that grew at the edge of our property blew
down during a windstorm.  It fell on a steep slope covered with vines
-- vinca, I think -- and it was drattedly difficult to get to.  I let
it sit for a couple weekends, not wanting to tackle a task that
involved sharp tools and a steep slope when that slope was also wet.
But this weekend, the weather is fine.  So yesterday morning, I got a
saw and a rope from Lowes, and I set to cutting and hauling.  The work
went surprisingly quickly, and after about two hours, we had a brush
pile and some logs to finish cutting into firewood.  And that was
that.

A couple weeks ago, a bit after the tree fell, I agreed with one of my
students that I was going to help him write the code for describing
boundaries in our finite element code.  After staring at it for a
while, I decided the right way to handle the boundary curve was to
generate a Chebyshev polynomial approximation to a parametric
description provided by the user as part of a larger mapped block mesh
generator.  So on Thursday this week, I sat down and wrote and tested the
code to fit that parametric approximation, evaluate it quickly, and
get the derivatives that I need to compute surface normals.  It took
about the same amount of time to get the basic functionality working
as it took me to chop up the tree.  And, like cutting up the tree, it
felt pretty good to get it out of the way.


