---
layout:     post
title:      Flailing
tags:     [teaching, musings]
---

Here is how you solve a problem in a scientific computing class.

1. Read the problem statement carefully.  Make sure that you
    understand what you are supposed to be figuring out.
2. Figure out how you're going to sanity check your solution.  This
    could be a check to see that the answer satisfies an equation that
    it is supposed to satisfy, or a check on the order of magnitude of
    some quantity, or a check to make sure that the procedure works
    correctly for an set of parameters for which the answer is known
    in closed form.  A picture is usually helpful.
3. Try to find a numerically convenient problem formulation.  At the
    very least, this usually means changing to a new set of variables.
4. Taylor expand, change coordinates, and repeat.
5. Sanity check your analytical computations against numerics; sanity
    check your numerical computations with analysis.
    
Here is how you fail to solve a problem in a scientific computing
class.

1. Choose the most prominent looking equation in the problem statement
    and fixate on it.  Ignore the surrounding text.
2. Look on Wikipedia to see if there is a problem that looks almost
    the same.  Be careful not to think too much before Googling, or
    you might accidentally gain some insight.
3. Take whatever you found on Wikipedia and dump it into Mathematica.
    Be careful not to simplify, check for typos, or otherwise sanity check
    this step.
4. Wildly guess some manipulation that you should apply to whatever
    formulas you've scraped from your Wikipedia and Mathematica
    wanderings.  Ideally, you should avoid any manipulation having to
    do with Taylor series, integration by parts, or basic linear
    algebra in order to avoid accidentally landing on a good approach.
5. Test with one set of inputs and conclude that if the answer is not NaN or
    inf, then your computation is correct.  By no means should you
    draw a picture or think critically about your answer; this might
    lead to realizing that what you've done makes now sense.
    
The latter approach is colloquiually called "flailing."
