---
layout:     post
title:        Five minute masterpiece
tags:       fiver
---

It takes me more than five minutes to write the typical email,
anything beyond a one-line response that says that I can meet or that
my office hours have been moved.  Writing anything more technical, I
move at a glacial pace.  This is not a good thing, and I know it.

One of the ways that I try to keep myself from overthinking things is
by writing with a pen.  I type faster than I can think through my
sentences at times, so I'm always stuck hitting backspace from time
to time when I use the computer.  But I write more slowly, which
paradoxically means that I often end up producing more writing per
unit of time with a pen than with a keyboard, only because I throw
less of it away.  And this feels a little silly.  It's the product of
habits that I should be able to revise or work around.

So let's work on revising or working around those habits.  This is my
experiment: the five minute masterpiece.  I sit and type for five
minutes, and whatever is done at the end of that time, I post.  It
could be me writing about something technical or something absurd; the
only rule is that it must be done quickly, with a minimum of fretting
over revision.  Also, ideally, it should involve only very brief
seconds where I stare off into space and try to marshal my thoughts
into words, rather than periods of a minute or two.

At the moment, I have a sleeping baby sitting in front of me, and she
is starting to stir.  That'll keep me honest for today.  What will I
do to manage this more generally?  I don't know, but I imagine I'll
figure something out!
