---
layout:   post
title:      Error analysis
tags:     [fiver, musings, teaching]
---

This morning, I uploaded the grades for the third project that I
assigned for my scientific computing class this semester.  The project
involved understanding the behavior of a thermal ignition model, and
involved several steps.  In each step, there was an approximation.  At
the end of the assignment, I asked the students how many digits of
their answers they believed, and why.  I did say that it was okay to
not be rigorous, and that experimental evidence and convergence plots
were fine.

They didn't do so well at this.  This difficulty made the project
tremendously difficult to grade.  It also set me to thinking about the
nature of teaching error analysis in an introductory scientific
computing class.

Few of my students should ever have to re-implement the basic
algorithms they learn in this class.  There are standard libraries
that include good implementations of many of these methods, and the
authors of those standard libraries spend time to make sure the
implementations they provide are as robust and flexible as possible.
The same is true of an introductory algorithms course, though: for the
most part, the world does not need another implementation of
quicksort, and it certainly does not need another implementation of
bubblesort.  What it needs is people who *understand* sorting
algorithms well enough so that they can make intelligent choices
between competing methods.  In the case of sorting, that means
understanding the effects of different key distributions, how
nearly-sorted data differs from completely-unsorted data, and the care
and maintenance of asymptotic complexity results.  In the case of
numerical methods, that means understanding how different methods rely
on different problem characteristics, and the differences in
efficiency and error that ensue.  The important question is not "how
can I compute X," but "how can I compute X with enough speed and
accuracy to attain my higher-level goal Y."

At the end of the day, I just want to make sure that any bridges my
students might build don't fall down because they believed their
simulations too much.  My conclusion from this project is that I hope
many of my students are not allowed to build bridges without
supervision in the immediate future.
