---
layout:     post
title:      Engineering
tags: musings
---

My training is in mathematics and computer science, but engineering
has always been part of my intellectual environment.  My circle of
close friends consists disproportionately of engineers.  My father is
an engineer.  One of my brothers is an engineer.  I was co-advised by
a civil engineer, and did a graduate minor in mechanical engineering.
And I came to Cornell in part for the strength of the engineering
program.  I spend a lot of time learning from colleagues in
engineering about the cool things they think about.  Sometimes, I get
the chance to help them out; but even if I don't, it's fun to learn.

I work in computational science and engineering (CSE), and most of my
work involves using computers to analyze mathematical models from the
sciences and engineering.  A lot of what I do is essentially
engineering applied to computational mathematics.  Our models of the
world are generally incomplete, and even very simplified models often
admit no close form solution, nor even a very simple analysis.  The
goal of most scientific computing answer is to devise methods that are
fast enough and get solutions that are right enough to a problem
arising from a model that is good enough, where "fast enough", "right
enough" and "good enough" are concepts defined by some underlying
problem.  Ideally, I want my work to result in artifacts -- theories, codes,
design rules, or approximation methods -- that are useful tools for
someone else who is doing something cool.

The basic skills needed to do numerical computing seem like everyday
fare: a solid understanding of calculus and linear algebra, some
programming ability, and a bit of common sense about what things are
actually worth computing.  But none of these skills are actually so
everyday as what one might initially think (which keeps teaching
entertaining).  Of these skills, common sense is the most elusive,
uncommon, and important.  And of these skills, the common-sense
appraisal, the understanding of what is actually needed to achieve a
goal and the trade-offs in how to get there, is what I most associate
with engineering.
