---
layout: post
title:  Coding katas for computation classes
tags:   [advice, teaching, math, technology]
---

It's the middle of the fall semester, just before fall break.  That
means that I have had just enough time to develop a certain amount of
exasperation with student coding habits.  From the Friday afternoon
before a long weekend, I give you this brief, cathartic set of
thoughts.

### Programming exercises are katas

Code for a classs supposed to make your brain comfortable going
through certain motions, so that you're better equipped to go through
those motions when you face a computation in anger.  It should not be
a long, mindless slog (though it may be long).  If it is, you're doing
it wrong.

### Start early

You don't have to finish early; you just have to understand what
you're facing well enough to plan.  Do you basically know how to do
the problems?  Do you need to read more deeply?  Will you want help in
office hours?

If you're continually late, try tracking how much time you think the
work will take at the outset, and how much time it actually takes.
If you're surprised by the difference, keep recording it until it sinks in.

### Don't hack mindlessly

Before you start programming your solution, read the prompt.  Write a
tester.  Include some randomly generated test cases, but don't rely on
them alone.  Document, at least for yourself, what you assume about
the input and output parameters.  Look for singularities and
pathologies; are they ruled out by design?  By all means, pull up a
MATLAB prompt and play with some ideas early on, but treat those
experiments like the early scrawls you make on a pad.  They're
stepping stones, not a thoughtful solution.

### Get code working early

Start with the simple case: serial, unoptimized, trivial code.  Use
existing building blocks where possible.  Find your mistakes as soon
as possible after you've made them.  Don't wait until after you've
written the entire program.  That way lies madness, or at least bad
karma.

### Find a friend

Ideally, find a friend who is going through what you're going through.
Talk, away from the computer.

Ideally, also find a patient friend who has no idea about computing.
Find a way to tell that friend why your problem is cool or
challenging.  If your friend suggests you go get coffee or tea or
something instead, accept -- if time permits.
