---
layout: post
title:  Requirements
tags:   [musings, teaching]
---

Our department has recently been revisiting the subject of PhD
competency and breadth requirements, largely spurred by figuring out
the logistics of moving students down to NYC to work with advisers at
the new tech campus.  It seems unlikely 
that [our current structure][1] will change much, but it's interesting
to consider the current set of course and exam requirements and what
they mean.

The goal of the requirements is simple: students should be competent
in core areas of computer science at an undergraduate level, and they
should be exposed to a broad set of topics at the graduate level.
Graduate school may not emphasize the ideals of the well-rounded
student in the same way that undergraduate programs do, but we'd
prefer our students to come out knowing about more than their
particular sub-sub-field of computer science.  The requirements we
have provide a guide to what the department feels a prototypical
broadly-educated computer scientist ought to know, and there is a
clause that explicitly states that we're flexible for non-traditional
areas that may require substantial breadth outside of computer science
as well.

At the moment, we have competency requirements in four research areas:
AI, programming languages, systems, and theory.  We list "scientific
computing and applications" as an area as well, but we have no
competency requirement there.  I was not around when the scientific
computing requirement was struck, but I think there is a plausible
argument that it not be required: many undergraduates with otherwise
excellent computer science training have nonetheless never taken
scientific computing.  The competency requirement is supposed to
emphasize a common core that we think most undergraduates should
basically know when they start graduate school, and scientific
computing no longer falls in that category.  I mostly agree with this,
though I've noticed that Cornell undergraduate can also finish a CS
degree without taking classes in AI or PL.

But there is also a more positive view: we shouldn't have an explicit
requirement in scientific computing for the same reason we don't have
requirements in basic programming, discrete mathematics, or elementary
probability.  These things are so fundamental to CS that we assume a
graduate student wouldn't ever have been admitted without knowing
about them; and a student that didn't know about these things would
have a hard time passing the other competency requirement.  Knowing
how to multiply matrices and solve linear systems, or how to reason
about approximations and iterations, ought to be equally fundamental,
in the sense that a student who knows nothing of these topics would
have a hard time passing competency requirements in areas like theory
or AI.  This may not actually be true now, but as competency in
dealing with large data sets becomes ever more part of the "core" of
computer science, I have a hard time seeing how a little knowledge of
numerical computing cannot follow.

Of course, I'd also love for students to know more about numerical
linear algebra, polynomial interpolation, numerical differentiation
and quadrature, and methods for solving differential equations.  For
their own protection, I hope some learn as well about the vagaries of
floating point arithmetic and basic error analysis.  But even at my
most optimistic, I have a hard time seeing a future in which these
topics move back into our list of topics that we all think computer
scientists must know.

  [1]: http://www.cs.cornell.edu/phd/requirements
