---
layout: post
title:  Foucault doodle
tags:   [fiver, math, technology]
---

September 18 would have been the 194th birthday of Leon Foucault, a
French physicist most famous for devising a pendulum that demonstrates
the rotation of the Earth.  I've learned a bit more about this
experiment over the past couple years.

One of the fascinating aspects of Foucault's pendulum is how many ways
there are to reason about it.  Being who I am, I usually think about
this in terms of oscillator coupling.  Imagine you are standing in a
room looking at a Foucault pendulum moving back and forth.  The motion
you see could be described in terms of two different "modes": either
you would see the pendulum swing from left to right, or from front to
back.  Clearly, this description is somewhat arbitrary, since you
could move to a different position in the same room and thus change
what "left-right" and "front-back" meant to you.  That is, the system
is *invariant* under rotation about its axis.  Among other things,
invariance means that the modes of motion (front-back or side-side)
have to generally look the same; same "shape", same frequency, etc.
When a system has two oscillations at exactly the same frequency,
small perturbations from the outside world (such as gyroscopic forces
due to the rotation of the earth) have the effect of transferring
energy back and forth between these modes of oscillation.  This appears
as the precession of the line along which Foucault's pendulum swings.

The exact same mathematics describe many different systems, each with
different names attached.  The [hemispherical rate-integrating
gyroscope][hrg] is essentially a solid-wave version of Foucault's
pendulum built out of a wine glass, as is [sometimes noted by those
still working on such devices][sna2012].  The same thing works when
the oscillations involve light rather than elastic waves, and this is
the basis of [ring laser gyroscopes][rlgwiki].  Physicists sometimes
talk about [geometric phase][geomwiki] (or Berry phase) to describe
this general type of perturbed oscillation.

I find it fascinating when these same concepts keep appearing in
different parts of the literature under different guises.

I also learned this summer that I spent many years utterly mangling
Foucault's name.

[hrg]: http://www.northropgrumman.com/Capabilities/HRG/Documents/hrg.pdf
[sna2012]: http://mems.eng.uci.edu/publications/prikhodko-zotov-trusov-shkel-sna2012.pdf
[rlgwiki]: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ring_laser_gyroscope
[geomwiki]: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Geometric_phase