---
layout: post
title:  Windows
tags:   [fiver, technology]
---

My primary computer is a MacBook Pro.  It's a couple years old now,
and it is still running OS X 10.7, but I'm still quite happy with it.
I've been using a Mac laptop as my primary machine for about eight
years now; prior to that, I spent many years using Linux as my main
OS; and prior to that, I used Windows (and at one time DOS).  But I
try not to be dogmatic about things, and have been running with at
least two different types of operating systems -- sometimes on the
same hardware, sometimes on different machines -- since I was an
undergrad.

A few weeks ago, I decided that we needed a family desktop at home,
something that my wife and I could both use for record-keeping and
word processing, and that I could also use as an additional box for
building and testing code.  Both because J will be using it and
because I already have access to OS X and Linux boxes elsewhere, I
went with a modest-but-not-puny refurbished HP with Windows 8
pre-installed.  I thought about running Ubuntu and using KVM (or some
other virtualization layer) for running Windows, but... meh.  I'm sure
I would have learned something from setting things up that way, but it
would take more time than I really wanted to invest to fiddle it into
a shape that I liked.  Also, that time would have to come out of the
precious few evening hours that I don't devote to work or family.  So
a Windows 8 box it was on arrival, and a Windows 8 box it has
remained.

And what have I discovered?  Well, for one thing, I've discovered that
I find the Windows 8 UI intuitive, and the odd bits of friction in the
system seem mostly to do with places where old and new metaphors are
forced to coexist.  I will still be happier once I've figured out how
to do more things with the keyboard -- I'm faster typing than I am
mousing -- but I've had little trouble figuring out how to do the
things that I want to do.  I wouldn't say that I like it *more* than
my setup under OS X, nor more than Ubuntu, but it's not obvious to me
that I like it *less* either; it's just a little less familiar.

Now, I'm unlikely to switch from a UNIX-based system as my chief
development platform any time in the immediate future, despite having
a fairly comfortable setup with Cygwin 64 on the new Windows box.  But
I like having a Windows box to play with at home.  I like to see that
desktop user interfaces are being forced to evolve, and I like to see
that different operating systems are not all going in exactly the same
direction.  I also like the idea that I won't draw a complete blank
when asked to do something with a machine running any one of the three
major desktop OS flavors du jour, and that I can build and test my
software on each of those three systems.